d# Enchanted Rose Prop

## Components

- Glass Cloche
- Electronics
- Rose and Petals

## How It Works

There's a Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W inside the prop which hosts a website. This website controls a controller API written in Python, which speaks to the GPIO pins on the Raspberry Pi. Those pins in turn tell the circuitry to turn on the motors and lights. To drop the petals, the Raspberry Pi briefly turns on an air jet for that petal. Air pressure forces the petal to fall. 

## Power Supply 

There three different batteries required for this device:

* Main computer requires a 5V microUSB connector. I recommend something like a 10000mah portable USB battery. (Alternative: You could plug in an official micro-USB Raspberry Pi Power Adapter.) 
* Lights: The multicolored accent lights require 3 AA batteries.
* Pumps: These require a 9V battery.

## Operation

The prop is designed to be operated from a mobile phone via its own wifi network. Turn on the prop and wait 30-60 seconds for it to boot up. Open up your phone's Wifi settings, and look for and connect to the "**EnchantRose**" network, using the password "**beourguest**!" (Note that this network is 2.4Ghz, not the newer 5Ghz band.)

Do not disclose the password for the prop's wifi; the prop is only meant to be operated by one person at a time. 

1. Ensure batteries are fresh and that battery packs are turned on. Fresh AA batteries are recommended for each performance, but should last through at least 3-4 performances as they are only used for the motor and lights. 
2. Turn on the power to the prop
3. Wait 30 seconds or so
4. Use your mobile phone's wifi setting -- look for a new wifi network: "EnchantRose"
5. Join it, using password: "beourguest!" (it's case sensitive)
6. Then, you can visit http://192.168.11.1 to see the control interface



## Troubleshooting

| Symptom                                                      | Try these steps                                              |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| No "EnchantRose" network shown on my mobile phone            | See if another device can see it -- tested with iPhone<br />Ensure power to device is on and that micro-SD card is firmly inserted -- there should be a green light on the RPi <br /> |
| I can connect to controller interface, but it says it cannot connect to device | Try "Connect to Device" button on control. If you get an error in the box below, contact Steve. |
| I can connect to controller interface, but when I press the drop button, nothing happens | Most likely, batteries are depleted, or the battery pack wires aren't connected to the pump motors. |
| Lights don't turn on                                         | Check that the battery packs are fresh, and check the wiring |

Make sure batteries are fresh.

## Author

Built by Steve Murch. 

For current notes, visit https://stevemurch.com (or specifically [https://www.stevemurch.com/category/tech/maker-projects](https://www.stevemurch.com/category/tech/maker-projects).) You'll find a "get in touch" link on that site as well, if you have specific questions. 



